Symptoms of gastritis:
Gastritis may not cause any noticeable symptoms. If it does, it may mean that it’s more severe or it’s been going on for a long time. Symptoms may happen when your stomach lining is worn down enough that it can’t defend itself against its own acids and enzymes anymore. The acids may cause symptoms of indigestion, or they may cause stomach ulcers, which can hurt and bleed. Symptoms may include:
	Loss of appetite, or feeling full soon after eating.
	Stomach pain and bloating.
	Nausea and/or vomiting.
	If you have a bleeding ulcer, you may find:
	Black blood in your poop (melena).
	Black blood in your vomit (coffee ground emesis)

Diagnose guideline:
A healthcare provider will start by asking you about your symptoms and health history. They might suspect gastritis based on your answers, but they won’t know for sure if you have it without testing for it. They might begin with an imaging test, such as an upper GI series, a series of X-rays of your upper GI tract. This test can detect ulcers or erosion in your stomach lining, though not always gastritis itself.
The real proof of gastritis is microscopic, so a healthcare provider will need a tissue sample to confirm it. They can take a sample (biopsy) during an upper endoscopy exam. This exam goes inside your upper GI tract with a tiny camera on the end of a long catheter (endoscope). An endoscopist can take a biopsy through the endoscope. They’ll usually recognize gastritis visually even before the biopsy confirms it.
You might need additional tests to isolate the cause of gastritis or to check for complications. Your provider may order:
	Blood tests.
	Stool test.
	H. pylori breath test.

Management and Treatment:
Acute gastritis goes away after the acute cause of it does. If you have an infection, in most cases your immune system will clear it out shortly, and then the inflammation will go down. If you briefly overdosed on alcohol or pills, your stomach lining will soon repair itself. If blood flow to your stomach was temporarily reduced but is now restored, your stomach lining will begin the healing process.
Chronic gastritis doesn’t go away by itself, but treatment can help it go away. Chronic gastritis is linked to another chronic condition that you have. Specific treatments can cure some of these conditions. Other conditions aren’t curable, but long-term treatments can reduce the inflammation they cause. Chronic gastritis may have done deeper damage to your tissues, so they may take longer to heal.
