DIAGNOSIS
A diagnosis of chronic plaque psoriasis can be made by physical examination in the vast majority of patients. A skin biopsy can be helpful for challenging cases but is not usually necessary. There are no other laboratory tests that confirm the diagnosis. Genetic testing is not used for the diagnosis of psoriasis.

The diagnostic approach for guttate, pustular, erythrodermic, and nail psoriasis is reviewed separately.

1. History and physical examination – A full skin examination that includes examination of the scalp, nails, and anogenital skin should be offered to patients with suspected chronic plaque psoriasis. Supportive examination findings include chronic, well-demarcated, inflamed plaques with coarse scale, particularly when involvement of the scalp, ears, elbows, knees, and umbilicus is present. The recognition of characteristic nail disease or inverse psoriasis in the intergluteal cleft or other sites can support a diagnosis of psoriasis in difficult cases.

    Helpful patient history questions may include inquiries regarding a family history of psoriasis and exposure to medications that may induce or exacerbate psoriasis.

2. Skin biopsy – A skin biopsy may be performed if the diagnosis remains uncertain after the history and physical examination. Typically, a 4 mm punch biopsy from involved skin is performed, though a shave biopsy through the mid-dermis may also be adequate. A periodic acid-Schiff-diastase (PAS-D) stain of the specimen may help distinguish psoriasis from a superficial fungal infection.


ADDITIONAL EVALUATION
In addition to the evaluation above, patients with psoriasis should be assessed for signs or symptoms of psoriatic arthritis and other comorbidities.

Joint guidelines from the American Academy of Dermatology and the National Psoriasis Foundation recommend routine screening for signs and symptoms of psoriatic arthritis to facilitate the earliest possible detection. Screening questions can include asking about the presence of joint pain, joint stiffness (particularly morning stiffness), and back pain (which patients may not recognize as a manifestation of joint pain).

Assessment for other comorbidities is reviewed separately.

The proportion of patients with psoriasis and ocular disorders is not definitively known, and guidelines for screening for ocular involvement in patients with psoriasis have not been established. Asking patients about ocular symptoms at each follow-up visit may help to identify patients with ocular involvement. In addition, some authors have suggested routine ophthalmic examinations every one to two years in patients with severe psoriasis.